@c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../src/booleans

@node Booleans, Equivalence, Introduction, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

@chapter Booleans
@cindex booleans

  The boolean data type consists of two values, which are called true
and false, and have respectively external representations @code{#t}
and @code{#f}.  There are no possible mutations of either of these two 
@c add encapsulated cross ref
values, and the boolean type is encapsulated.

@deffn Applicative boolean? (boolean? . objects)
  The primitive type predicate for type boolean.  @code{boolean?}
returns true iff all the objects in @code{objects} are of type boolean.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative not? (not? boolean)
  Applicative @code{not?} is a predicate that returns the logical
negation of its argument.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative and? (and? . booleans)
  Applicative @code{and?} is a predicate that returns true unless one
or more of its arguments are false.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative or? (or? . booleans)
  Applicative @code{or?} is a predicate that returns false unless one
or more of its arguments are true.
@end deffn

@deffn Operative $and? ($and? . list)
  The @code{$and?} operative performs a ``short-circuit and'' of its
operands.  It evaluates them from left to right, until either an
operand evaluates to false, or the end of the list is reached.  If the
end of the list is reached (which is immediate if @code{list} is
@code{nil}), the operative returns true.  If an operand evaluates to
false, no further operand evaluations are performed, and the operative
returns false.  If @code{list} is acyclic, and the last operand is
@c TODO cross ref tail-contect
evaluated, it is evaluated as a tail context.  If @code{list} is
cyclic, an unbounded number of operand evaluations may be
performed.  If any of the operands evaluates to a non-boolean value, an
error is signaled (even if it's the last one).
@end deffn

@deffn Operative $or? ($or? . list)
  The @code{$or?} operative performs a ``short-circuit or'' of its
operands.  It evaluates them from left to right, until either an
operand evaluates to true, or the end of the list is reached.  If the
end of the list is reached (which is immediate if @code{list} is
@code{nil}), the operative returns false.  If an operand evaluates to
true, no further operand evaluations are performed, and the operative
returns true.  If @code{list} is acyclic, and the last operand is
@c TODO cross ref tail-contect
evaluated, it is evaluated as a tail context.  If @code{list} is
cyclic, an unbounded number of operand evaluations may be
performed.  If any of the operands evaluates to a non-boolean value, an
error is signaled (even if it's the last one).
@end deffn

