@c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../src/continuations

@node Continuations, Encapsulations, Combiners, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

@chapter Continuations
@cindex continuations

  A continuation is a plan for all future computation, parameterized
by a value to be provided, and contingent on the states of all mutable
data structures (which notably may include environments). When the
Kernel evaluator is invoked, the invoker provides a continuation to
which the result of the evaluation will normally be returned.

  For example, when @code{$if} evaluates its test operand, the
continuation provided for the result expects to be given a boolean
value; and, depending on which boolean it gets, it will evaluate
either the consequent or the alternative operand as a tail context —
that is, the continuation provided for the result of evaluating the
selected operand is the same continuation that was provided for the
result of the call to @code{$if}.

  A Kernel program may sometimes capture a continuation; that is,
acquire a reference to it as a first-class object. The basic means of
continuation capture is applicative @code{call/cc}.  Given a
first-class continuation @code{c}, a combiner can be constructed that
will abnormally pass its operand tree to @code{c} (as opposed to the
@c TODO add xref to abnormal pass
normal return of values to continuations). In the simplest case, the
abnormally passed value arrives at @code{c} as if it had been normally
returned to @code{c}. In general, continuations bypassed by the
abnormal pass may have entry/exit guards attached to them, and these
guards can intercept the abnormal pass before it reaches @code{c}.
Each entry/exit guard consists of a selector continuation, which
designates which abnormal passes the guard will intercept, and an
interceptor applicative that performs the interception when selected.
@c TODO add xref to guard-continuation, continuation->applicative
@c and abnormal pass

  Continuations are immutable, and are @code{equal?} iff @code{eq?}.
The continuation type is encapsulated.

@c TODO add dynamic extent & guard selection/interception to the intro
@deffn Applicative continuation? (continuation? . objects)
  The primitive type predicate for type continuation.
@code{continuation?} returns true iff all the objects in
@code{objects} are of type continuation.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative call/cc (call/cc combiner)
  Calls @code{combiner} in the dynamic environment as a tail context,
passing as sole operand to it the continuation to which @code{call/cc}
would normally return its result.  (That is, constructs such a
combination and evaluates it in the dynamic environment.)
@c TODO add xref Cf. operative $let/cc , §7.3.2.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative extend-continuation (extend-continuation continuation applicative [environment]) 
  The @code{extend-continuation} applicative constructs and returns a
new child of @code{continuation} that, when it normally receives a
value v, calls the underlying combiner of @code{applicative} with
dynamic environment @code{environment} (or an empty environment if
none was specified) and operand tree @code{v}, the result of the call
normally to be returned to @code{continuation}.

  The following equivalnece defines the short version:
@example
(extend-continuation c a) @equiv{} 
  (extend-continuation c a (make-environment))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative guard-continuation (guard-continuation entry-guards continuation exit-guards)
  @code{entry-guards} and @code{exit-guards} should each be a list of
clauses; each clause should be a list of length two, whose first
element is a continuation, and whose second element is an applicative
whose underlying combiner is operative.  

  Applicative @code{guard-continuation} constructs two continuations:
a child of continuation, called the @code{outer continuation}; and a
child of the @code{outer continuation}, called the @code{inner
continuation}.  The @code{inner continuation} is returned as the
result of the call to @code{guard-continuation}.

  When the @code{inner continuation} normally receives a value, it
passes the value normally to the @code{outer continuation}; and when
the @code{outer continuation} normally receives a value, it passes the
value normally to @code{continuation}. Thus, in the absence of
abnormal passing, the inner and outer continuations each have the same
behavior as @code{continuation}.

  The two elements of each guard clause are called, respectively, the
@code{selector} and the @code{interceptor}.  The @code{selector}
continuation is used in deciding whether to intercept a given abnormal
pass, and the @code{interceptor} applicative is called to perform
@c TODO add xref to selection and interception
customized action when interception occurs.

@c TODO add xref to evaluation structure
At the beginning of the call to @code{guard-continuation}, internal
copies are made of the evaluation structures of @code{entry-guards}
and @code{exit-guards}, so that the selectors and interceptors
contained in the arguments at that time remain fixed thereafter,
independent of any subsequent mutations to the arguments.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative continuation->applicative (continuation->applicative continuation)
  Returns an applicative whose underlying operative abnormally passes
its operand tree to @code{continuation}, thus: A series of
interceptors are selected to handle the abnormal pass, and a
continuation is derived that will normally perform all the
interceptions in sequence and pass some value to the destination of
the originally abnormal pass.  The operand tree is then normally
passed to the derived continuation.
@c TODO add xref to selection and interception
@end deffn

@defvar root-continuation
  This continuation is the ancestor of all other continuations. When
it normally receives a value, it terminates the Kernel session. (For
example, if the system is running a read-eval-print loop, it exits the
loop.)
@c TODO add xref  Cf. applicative exit, §7.3.4.
@end defvar

@defvar error-continuation
  The dynamic extent of this continuation is mutually disjoint from
the dynamic extent in which Kernel computation usually occurs (such as
the dynamic extent in which the Kernel system would run a
read-eval-print loop).  

  When this continuation normally receives a value, it provides a
diagnostic message to the user of the Kernel system, on the assumption
that the received value is an attempt to describe some error that
aborted a computation; and then resumes operation of the Kernel system
at some point that is outside of all user-defined computation. (For
example, if the system is running a read-eval-print loop, operation
may resume by continuing from the top of the loop.)

  The diagnostic message is not made available to any Kernel
computation, and is therefore permitted to contain information that
violates abstractions within the system.  

@c TODO add details about klisp error messages
  When an error is signaled during a Kernel computation, the signaling
action consists of an abnormal pass to some continuation in the
dynamic extent of @code{error-continuation}.
@end defvar

@deffn Applicative apply-continuation (apply-continuation continuation object)
  Applicative @code{apply-continuation} converts its first argument to
an applicative as if by @code{continuation->applicative}, and then
applies it as usual.

  That is:
@example
(apply-continuation continuation object) @equiv{}
  (apply (continuation->applicative continuation) object)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Operative ($let/cc <symbol> . <objects>)
  A child environment @code{e} of the dynamic environment is created,
containing a binding of @code{<symbol>} to the continuation to which
the result of the call to @code{$let/cc} should normally return; then,
the subexpressions of @code{<objects>} are evaluated in @code{e} from
left to right, with the last (if any) evaluated as a tail context, or
if @code{<objects>} is empty the result is inert.

  That is:
@example
($let/cc symbol . objects) @equiv{} 
  (call/cc ($lambda (symbol) . objects))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative guard-dynamic-extent (guard-dynamic-extent entry-guards combiner exit-guards)
  This applicative extends the current continuation with the specified
guards, and calls @code{combiner} in the dynamic extent of the new
continuation, with no operands and the dynamic environment of the call
to @code{guard-dynamic-extent}.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative exit (exit)
@c TODO add xref
  Applicative @code{exit} initiates an abnormal transfer of
@code{#inert} to @code{root-continuation}.

  That is:
@example
(exit ) @equiv{} (apply-continuation root-continuation #inert)
@end example
@end deffn




