@c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../src/intro

@node License, Introduction, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

klisp is licensed under the terms of the MIT license reproduced below.
This means that klisp is free software and can be used for both academic
and commercial purposes at absolutely no cost. 
The two projects whose code klisp uses, Lua & IMath, are also distributed 
under the MIT license.

@itemize @bullet
@item 
klisp Parts: Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Andres Navarro.
@item 
Lua Parts: Copyright @copyright{} 1994-2010 Lua.org, PUC-Rio.
@item 
IMath Parts: Copyright @copyright{} 2002-2007 Michael J. Fromberger.
@item 
srfi-78: Copyright @copyright{} 2005-2006 Sebastian Egner.
@end itemize

@unnumbered MIT/X11 License

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
THE SOFTWARE.

@c add next node 
@node Introduction, (dir), License, Top
@chapter Introduction

  klisp is an open source interpreter for the Kernel Programming
Language. It aims at being comprehensive and robust as specified in
the @cite{Revised(-1) Report on the Kernel Programming Language}, but
that probably won't happen for some time. It is written in C99 under
the MIT license. It draws heavily from the Lua interpreter source
code & file structure. It uses the IMath library for arbitrary sized
integers and rationals.

  The Kernel programming language is a statically scoped and properly
tail-recursive dialect of Lisp, descended from Scheme. It is designed
to be simpler and more general than Scheme, with an exceptionally
clear, simple, and versatile semantics, only one way to form compound
expressions, and no inessential restrictions on the power of that one
compound form. Imperative, functional, and message-passing programming
styles (to name a few) may be conveniently expressed in Kernel.

  An important property of Kernel is that all manipulable entities in
Kernel are first-class objects. In particular, Kernel has no
second-class combiners; instead, the roles of special forms and macros
are subsumed by operatives, which are first-class, statically scoped
combiners that act directly on their unevaluated operands. Kernel
also has a second type of combiners, applicatives, which act on their
evalu- ated arguments. Applicatives are roughly equivalent to Scheme
procedures. However, an applicative is nothing more than a wrapper to
induce operand evaluation, around an underlying operative (or, in
principle, around another applicative, though that isn’t usually
done); applicatives themselves are mere facilitators to computation.

  You can read more about Kernel at
@url{http://web.cs.wpi.edu/~jshutt/kernel.html}.

  klisp is freely available for both academic and commercial purposes.
See LICENSE for details. it can be downloaded at 
@url{http://www.bitbucket.org/AndresNavarro/klisp}

  klisp is developed by Andres Navarro, a Computer Science
undergraduate at Buenos Aires University (UBA). You can reach him at
@email{canavarro82@@gmail.com}.

  This manual describes klisp version 0.1, presuming some familiarity
with the Lisp family of languages in general, and with the Kernel 
Programming Language in particular. There are frequent references to
the Kernel Programming Language Report. Unlike in the report, no
rationale is provided for any feature, only a description of the
implemented functionality. 

  This is edition 0.1.

@menu
* Caveats::                Flaws and a request for help.
* Kernel History::         Kernel is descended from Scheme.
* Conventions::            How the manual is formatted.
* Acknowledgements::       Contributions to this manual.
@end menu

@node Caveats, Kernel History, Introduction, Introduction
@section Caveats

  This is the first draft of this manual. It will be incomplete for
some time. It will also evolve, together with klisp and the Kernel
Programming Language, both of which, right now, are in a quite fluid
state.

@c this is below, in history
  The main reference on Kernel is the preliminary report: 
@cite{Revised(-1) Report on the Kernel Programming Language}. Some
sections of the report are still incomplete, so both klisp and this
manual will use specifications from other languages in these sections,
trying to follow the Kernel spirit. These instances will be documented
throughout the manual.

Please mail comments and corrections to
@email{canavarro82@@gmail.com}.

@noindent
@display
 --Andres Navarro
@end display

@node Kernel History, Conventions, Caveats, Introduction
@section Kernel History
@cindex Kernel history

  The Kernel Programming Language is a work in progress. It is being
developed by John N. Shutt, Ph.D, who created it while studying at the
Worcester Polytechnic Institute (I think about 2002, or so... ASK). It
is descended from scheme, with the idea that all objects should be
first class values. In particular, Kernel replaces macros with
operatives (kinda like statically scoped fexprs and fsubrs) and has
first class environments. Kernel also has the notion of encapsulated
objects which limits the ammount of information an implementation can
share with a Kernel program (e.g. There is no way in Kernel to get the
parents or a complete list of bindings of an environment object). 

@c this is repeated above, in caveats
  The main reference on Kernel is the preliminary report: 
@cite{Revised(-1) Report on the Kernel Programming Language}. Some
sections of the report are still incomplete, so both klisp and this
manual will use specifications from other languages in these sections,
trying to follow the Kernel spirit. These instances will be documented
throughout the manual.

  You can read all about Kernel at John's homepage at WPI 
@url{http://www.cs.wpi.edu/~jshutt/}, including the preliminary report
on the language and his doctoral dissertation which gives a
theorethical frame for fexprs. You can contact him at
@email{jshutt@@cs.wpi.edu}.

@node Conventions, Acknowledgements, Kernel History, Introduction
@section Conventions

  This section explains the notational conventions that are used in this
manual. You may want to skip this section and refer back to it later.

@menu
* Some Terms::               Explanation of terms we use in this manual.
@c TODO add sections for booleans, parameter trees, list structures,
@c naming conventions, etc.
* Evaluation Notation::      The format we use for examples of evaluation.
* Printing Notation::        The format we use for examples that print output.
* Error Messages::           The format we use for examples of errors.
* Format of Descriptions::   Notation for describing functions, variables, etc.
@end menu

@node Some Terms, Evaluation Notation, Conventions, Conventions
@subsection Some Terms

  Throughout this manual, the phrases ``the Kernel reader'' and ``the Kernel
printer'' are used to refer to those routines in Lisp that convert
textual representations of Kernel objects into actual objects, and
@c TODO xref to printed representations
vice versa. XXX Printed Representation XXX, for more details. You, the
person reading this manual, are assumed to be ``the programmer'' or
``the user''.

@cindex fonts
  Examples of Kernel code appear in this font or form: @code{(list 1 2
3)}. Names that represent arguments or metasyntactic variables appear
in this font or form: @var{first-number}.

@node Evaluation Notation, Printing Notation, Some Terms, Conventions
@subsection Evaluation Notation
@cindex evaluation notation
@cindex documentation notation

  When you evaluate a piece of Kernel code, it produces a result. In the
examples in this manual, this is indicated with @samp{@result{}}:

@example
(car (cons 1 2))
     @result{} 1
@end example

@noindent
You can read this as ``@code{(car (cons 1 2))} evaluates to 1''.

  The semantics of a language feature are sometimes clarified, or even
defined, in its entry by specifying that two expressions are
equivalent. This is notated with @samp{@equiv{}}. For example, the 
semantics of applicative list* can be defined by following
equivalences:
@example
(list* arg1) @equiv{} arg1
(list* arg1 . more-args) @equiv{} (cons arg1 (list* . more-args))
@end example

@node Printing Notation, Error Messages, Evaluation Notation, Conventions
@subsection Printing Notation
@cindex printing notation

  Many of the examples in this manual print text when they are
evaluated. In examples that print text, the printed text is indicated with
@samp{@print{}}. The value returned by evaluating the form (here
@code{#t}) follows on a separate line.

@group
@example
($sequence (write 1) (write 2) #t)
     @print{} 1
     @print{} 2
     @result{} #t
@end example
@end group

@node Error Messages, Format of Descriptions, Printing Notation, Conventions
@subsection Error Messages
@cindex error message notation

  Some examples cause errors to be signaled. The report doesn't
specify what objects are passed to the error continuation, but in
klisp, objects passed to the error continuation are encapsulated error
objects that have at least a message and possibly some additional
objects and context informations (such as source code location). In
the examples, the error message is shown on a line starting with
@samp{@error{}}.

@example
(+ 23 #t)
@error{} Wrong type argument: (expected number) (#t)
@end example

@node Format of Descriptions,  , Error Messages, Conventions
@subsection Format of Descriptions
@cindex description format

  Applicatives, operatives, and other objects are described in this manual
in a uniform format. The first line of a description contains the
name of the item followed by its operands or arguments, if any.
@ifinfo
The category---operative, applicative, or whatever---appears at the
beginning of the line.
@end ifinfo
@iftex
The category---operative, applicative, or whatever---is printed next to the
right margin.
@end iftex
The description follows on succeeding lines, sometimes with examples.

@menu
* A Sample Applicative Description::       
@c TODO add operative and/or variable like root-continuation
@end menu

@node A Sample Applicative Description, , Format of Descriptions, Format of Descriptions
@subsubsection A Sample Applicative Description
@cindex applicative descriptions
@cindex operative descriptions
@cindex object descriptions

  In an applicative description, the name of the applicative being
described appears first. It is followed on the same line by an
applicative combination that includes the name of the applicative and
the arguments, as would appear in a program. The names used for the
arguments are also used in the body of the description.

  Here is a description of an imaginary applicative @code{foo}:

@deffn Applicative foo (foo integer1 integer2 . rest)
  The applicative @code{foo} subtracts @var{integer1} from @var{integer2},
then adds all the rest of the arguments to the result. 

@example
(foo 1 5 3 9)
     @result{} 16
@end example

More generally,

@example
(foo @var{w} @var{x} @var{y}@dots{})
@equiv{}
(+ (- @var{x} @var{w}) @var{y}@dots{})
@end example
@end deffn

  Any parameter whose name contains the name of a type (e.g.,
@var{integer}, @var{integer1} or @var{continuation}) is expected to be of that
type. A plural of a type (such as @var{numbers}) often means a list of
objects of that type. Parameters named @var{object} may be of any
type.
@c TODO add xref types of objects
(XXX Types of Lisp Object XXX, for a list of Kernel object types.)
Parameters with other sorts of names are
discussed specifically in the description of the combiner. In some
sections, features common to parameters of several combiners are
described at the beginning.

@c TODO xref to ptree
@c TODO clean this up a little
  Operative descriptions have the same format, but the word
`Applicative' is  replaced by `Operative', and `Argument' is replaced
by `Operand'. Also Operatives always have an environment parameter
(that can be #ignore or a symbol).

@node Acknowledgements,, Conventions, Introduction
@section Acknowledgements

  This manual was written by Andres Navarro.

  The structure and some text for this introductory section were
borrowed from the Elisp Manual by the Free Sofware Foundation. This
manual also borrows freely from both the Kernel Report and the Scheme
Reports.
