input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename klisp
@settitle klisp Reference Manual
@c %**end of header

@c TODO probably don't use all of these, this is from elisp
@c Combine indices.
@synindex cp fn
@syncodeindex vr fn
@syncodeindex ky fn
@syncodeindex pg fn
@syncodeindex tp fn
@c oops: texinfo-format-buffer ignores synindex
@c

@ifinfo
This file documents klisp.

@c The edition number appears in several places in this file
@c and also in the file intro.texi.
This is edition 0.1 of the klisp Reference Manual,  
for klisp version 0.1.

Copyright (C) 2011 Andres Navarro

Permission is granted to copy and distribute this manual, in whole or
in part. 
@c TODO put up better text for this.
@end ifinfo

@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@title klisp Reference Manual
@subtitle klisp version 0.1
@c The edition number appears in several places in this file
@c and also in the file intro.texi.
@subtitle Edition 0.1, May 2011

@author by Andres Navarro
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Andres Navarro

@sp 2
This is edition 0.1 of the @cite{klisp Reference Manual},
for klisp Version 01.,@*
May 2011.@*

@sp 2

Permission is granted to copy and distribute this manual, in whole or
in part. 
@end titlepage
@page

@node Top, License, (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
This Info file contains edition 0.1 of the klisp Reference Manual,
corresponding to klisp version 0.1.

Copyright @copyright{} 2011 Andres Navarro

Permission is granted to copy and distribute this manual, in whole or
in part. 
@c TODO put up better text for this.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* License::                 Conditions for copying and changing klisp.
* Introduction::            Introduction and conventions used.
@c TODO lisp types and other introductions
* Booleans::                Boolean module features.
* Equivalence::             Equivalence under mutation & Equivalence up to
mutation module features.
* Symbols::                 Symbol module features.
* Control::                 Control module features.
* Pairs and lists::         Pairs and lists and Pair mutation module features. 
@c TODO complete
* Index::                   Index including concepts, functions, variables,
                              and other terms.

@c Appendices
@c TODO

@c TODO add detailed node listing 
@end menu

@include intro.texi
@include booleans.texi
@include equivalence.texi
@include symbols.texi
@include control.texi
@include pairs_lists.texi

@c appendices
@c TODO

@include index.texi

@c Print the tables of contents
@summarycontents
@contents

@c That's all

@bye
