.TH KLISP 1 "$Date: 2011/11/23 06:35:03 $"
.SH NAME
klisp \- Kernel Programming Language interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B klisp
[
.I options
]
[
.I script
[
.I args
]
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B klisp
is a stand-alone klisp interpreter for 
the Kernel Programming Language.
It loads and evaluates Kernel programs
in textual source form.
.B klisp
can be used as a batch interpreter and also interactively.
.LP
The given
.I options
(see below)
are evaluated and then
the klisp program in file
.I script
is loaded and evaluated.
All evaluations mentioned, including the initialization 
that is described below, take place in the same
(initially) standard environment. All values that
result from these evaluation are discarded, but
if the root continuation or error continuation
are passed a value, the evaluation of options
is interrupted and the EXIT_STATUS is as described 
in the corresponding section.
The string
.I script
together with all
.I args
are available as a list of strings
via the applicative
.RI ' get-script-arguments '.
If these arguments contain spaces or other characters special to the shell,
then they should be quoted
(but note that the quotes will be removed by the shell).
The complete command line
including the name of the interpreter, options,
the script, and its arguments
are available as a list of strings
via the applicative
.RI ' get-interpreter-arguments '.
.LP
At the very beginning,
before even handling the command line,
.B klisp
reads and evaluates the contents of the environment variable
.BR KLISP_INIT ,
if it is defined.
To use an init file, just define 
.B KLISP_INIT
to the following form
.RI '(load
"/path/to/init-file")'.
.LP
Options start with
.B '\-'
and are described below.
You can use
.B "'\--'"
to signal the end of options.
.LP
If no arguments are given,
then
.B "\-v \-i"
is assumed when the standard input is a terminal;
otherwise,
.B "\-"
is assumed.
.LP
In interactive mode,
.B klisp
prompts the user,
reads expressions from the standard input,
and evaluates them as they are read.
The default prompt is "klisp> ".
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-
load and execute the standard input as a file,
that is,
not interactively,
even when the standard input is a terminal.
.TP
.BI \-e " expr"
evaluate expression
.IR expr .
You need to quote
.I expr 
if it contains spaces, quotes,
or other characters special to the shell.
.TP
.B \-i
enter interactive mode after
.I script
is executed.
.TP
.BI \-l " name"
evaluate
.BI (load " name")
before
.I script
is executed.
Typically used to do environment initialization.
.TP
.BI \-r " name"
evaluate
.BI (require " name")
before
.I script
is executed.
Typically used to load libraries.
.TP
.B \-v
show version information.
.SH EXIT STATUS
If the 
.I script
or 
.I stdin 
reach EOF or if there is no script,
.B EXIT_SUCCESS 
is returned.
If the root continuation is passed an object during
init, arguments or script evaluation 
.B EXIT_FAILURE
is returned.
If the 
.I root-continuation 
is passed an object,
.B klisp 
tries to convert the value passed to the 
.I root-continuation
to an exit status as follows:
.TP
If the value is an integer it is used as exit status.
.TP
If the value is a boolean then 
.B EXIT_SUCCESS 
is returned for 
.I #t 
and 
.B EXIT_FAILURE 
for 
.I #f.
.TP
If the value is inert, then
.B EXIT_SUCCESS 
is returned.
.TP
In any other case 
.B EXIT_FAILURE
is returned.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
http://klisp.org/
.br
The klisp Manual (info & html versions available).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Error messages should be self explanatory.
.SH AUTHORS
Andres Navarro
and
Oto Havle
.\" EOF
