@c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../src/libraries

@node Libraries, System, Vectors, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up

@chapter Libraries
@cindex libraries

Libraries provide a way to organize klisp code with a clean & clear
interface to the rest of the program.  They are first class objects
(as all manipulable entities in Kernel, and according to the
guidelines in the Kernel report). A library has list of exported
symbols and values for those symbols (generally combiners but may be
any object). The library type is encapsulated.

In addition there's a mechanism to refer to library objects by name
(where a name is actually a unique list of symbols and numbers), with
the ability to register new libraries, get the library object from a
name, unregister libraries, etc.  

These two ways of working with libraries conform the low level API to
libraries and are orthogonal to each other.  They are provided to
allow klisp programs to construct their own interface to library
definition and use, and to respect the guidelines and spirit of the
Kernel Report.

There's also a higher level API that is a combination of the lower level
APIs and behaves more like traditional module systems.  This is
probably what most klisp programs will use.  This API consist of the
@code{$provide-library!} operative to define (and register) new
libraries and the @code{$import-library!} operative to extract
bindings out of existing libraries.  This allows various forms of
controlling which bindings are extracted from the libraries and allows
various forms of renaming. It can be used both in the body of
libraries or in the top level.

No association is made by klisp between source files and libraries.
For a possible mechanism to handle this see @code{require} in the
ports module. Also no special meaning is assigned to the library
names.  This could be used by an even higher level API, for example to
map to version numbers and/or to the underlying filesystem.

SOURCE NOTE: This is mostly an adaptation from the r7rs draft of
scheme.  There's no mention of libraries in the Kernel Report, but
they were deemed important for klisp in order to share and distribute
code with a common interface.  A number of adaptations were made to
the scheme version to sit more comfortably with the Kernel way of
doing things (first class status, exposing of the library register,
etc).

@deffn Applicative library? (library? . objects)
The primitive type predicate for type library.
@code{library?} returns true iff all the objects in @code{objects}
are of type library.

NOTE: This is part of the low level API to libraries. It won't be
needed to writers or users of libraries that stick to the higher level
API (i.e. @code{$provide-library!} & @code{$import-library!}).
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative make-library (make-library bindings)
@code{bindings} should be an acyclic list of @code{(symbol . value)}
pairs.  Each symbol may only occur once in the list.

Constructs a new library object with the passed @code{bindings} as
exported objects.  

NOTE: This is part of the low level API to libraries, writers of
libraries are encouraged to use @code{$provide-library!} to define
their libraries.
@end deffn

@deffn Applicative get-library-export-list (get-library-export-list library)
@deffnx Applicative get-library-environment (get-library-environment library)
@code{get-library-export-list} returns the list of symbols exported
from the passed library.  @code{get-library-environment} returns a
fresh empty environment whose parent has all exported symbols of the
library bound to the exported objects.

NOTE: This is part of the low level API to libraries, users of
libraries are encouraged to use @code{$import-library!} to get
bindings out of libraries (and into the current environment).
@end deffn

@deffn Operative $registered-library? ($registered-library? name)
@deffnx Operative $get-registered-library ($get-registered-library name)
@deffnx Operative $register-library! ($register-library! name library)
@deffnx Operative $unregister-library! ($unregister-library! name)
@code{name} should a an acyclic list of symbols and exact non-negative
integers.  Two registered libraries can't have the same name (in the
sense of @code{equal?}).

These operatives control the library registry that maps names to
libraries.  

Predicate @code{$registered-library?} returns true iff a
library named @code{name} is already registered.
@code{get-registered-library} returns the library object associated
with @code{name} (or throws an error if no library named @code{name}
is registered).  @code{$register-library!} registers @code{library}
with name @code{name} (throws an error if @code{name} is already
registered.  @code{$unregister-library!} removes the library
registered as @code{name} from the library register (throws an error
if no such library was registered).

NOTE: This is part of the low level API to libraries, users & writers
of libraries are encouraged to use @code{$provide-library!} to create
& register new libraries.
@end deffn

@deffn Operative $provide-library! ($provide-library! name exports . body)
@deffnx Operative $import-library! ($import-library! . imports)
@code{name} should be as for @code{register-library!} and not already
registered.  @code{exports} should be a list of @code{(#:export
<export-spec> ...)}. Where @code{<export spec>} is either:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{symbol}
@item @code{(#:rename internal-symbol external-symbol)}
@end itemize

A lone symbol has the same semantics as the pair with that symbol in
both internal and external positions.  No symbol can appear more than once as external.
@code{body} should be an acyclic list of expressions.  @code{exports}
should be a list like @code{(<import-spec> ...)} where
@code{<import-spec>} is either
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{<name>}
@item @code{(#:only <import-spec> symbol ...)}
@item @code{(#:except <import-spec> symbol ...)}
@item @code{(#:prefix <import-spec> symbol)}
@item @code{(#:rename <import-spec> (orig-symbol new-symbol) ...)}
@end itemize

These two operatives conform the higher level API for klisp
libraries.  They are what most users of klisp (both writers and users
of libraries) will use.

Operative @code{$provide-library!} creates and register a library with
name @code{name} and exported symbols obtained from the @code{exports} list and
values prepared by the @code{body}.  First a child of the dynamic
environment is created.  Then, @code{body} is evaluated sequentially
as if by @code{$sequence} in that environment.  Next a new library is
created with a list of exported bindings that use the external symbols
in @code{exports} as names and the values bound by the corresponding
internal symbols in the created environment, as values.  If a lone
symbol is used in @code{exports} it is used both as internal and
external symbol for that binding.  Lastly, the new library object is
registered as @code{name}.  This mechanism more or less follows the
idea of operative @code{$provide!} from the Kernel Report, but it also
allows for renaming.

Operative @code{$import-library!} imports to the current environment
any combination of bindings from any number of named libraries, while
allowing renaming of said bindings.  It can be used in any context, as
any other Kernel expression.  @code{$import-library!} looks for the
named libraries and then extracts & renames the specified bindings
according to each @code{<import-spec>} and defines them (in the sense
of @code{$define!}  and @code{$set!}) in the current dynamic
environment.  The set of bindings to import are generated in a
recursive manner.  This allows a great deal of control of the imported
bindings and their names.  The semantics for the set of bindings
generated by the various @code{<import-spec>}s are as follows:
@itemize @bullet
@item 
@code{<name>}: All bindings from library @code{name}.
@item 
@code{(#:only <import-spec> symbol ...)}: Only the named bindings from
the set of bindings in @code{<import-spec>}.
@item
@code{(#:except <import-spec> symbol ...)}: All bindings from the set
in @code{<import-spec>} except those named in the list.
@item 
@code{(#:prefix <import-spec> symbol)}: All bindings from the set in
@code{<import-spec>} but renamed by prefixing each one with the
specified prefix @code{symbol}.
@item @code{(#:rename <import-spec> (orig-symbol new-symbol) ...)}:
All bindings from the set in @code{<import-spec>} but renaming all
@code{orig-symbol} to the corresponding @code{new-symbol}.
@end itemize

If two values are tried to be imported with the same name, they are
checked for @code{eq?}-ness, if they are deemed @code{eq?} to each
other they are imported, otherwise @code{$import-library!} throws an
error.  This helps catch name collisions while allowing to reexport
bindings from used libraries without conflict.
@end deffn
